README.md, before:

# ZeroRAG 🚀

**A production-ready RAG (Retrieval-Augmented Generation) system built entirely with free/open-source components**

[![Python](https://img.shields.io/badge/Python-3.8+-blue.svg)](https://python.org)
[![FastAPI](https://img.shields.io/badge/FastAPI-0.100+-green.svg)](https://fastapi.tiangolo.com)
[![Qdrant](https://img.shields.io/badge/Qdrant-Vector%20DB-orange.svg)](https://qdrant.tech)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](LICENSE)

## 🎯 Project Overview

ZeroRAG is a cost-effective, production-ready RAG system designed to provide intelligent document search and question-answering capabilities using entirely free and open-source components. Built with a focus on simplicity, performance, and zero ongoing costs.

### Key Features

- 🔍 **Intelligent Document Search**: Upload and search through documents with semantic understanding
- 💬 **AI-Powered Q&A**: Ask questions and get contextual answers from your documents
- 🚀 **Zero Cost**: Built entirely with free/open-source components
- 📊 **Multi-Format Support**: Handle TXT, CSV, MD files (PDF/DOCX coming soon)
- 🔄 **Real-time Streaming**: Get responses as they're generated
- 🎨 **Modern Web UI**: Clean, intuitive Streamlit interface
- 🛡️ **Production Ready**: Comprehensive error handling, logging, and monitoring
- 📱 **Responsive Design**: Works on desktop and mobile devices

### Technology Stack

- **Backend**: FastAPI, Python 3.8+
- **Vector Database**: Qdrant (free, self-hosted)
- **Cache**: Redis (free, self-hosted)
- **AI Models**: 
  - Local: Ollama with Llama 3.2 (1B parameters)
  - Fallback: HuggingFace Transformers
  - Embeddings: Sentence Transformers (all-MiniLM-L6-v2)
- **Frontend**: Streamlit
- **Infrastructure**: Docker Compose
- **Configuration**: Pydantic Settings

## 🏗️ Architecture

```
┌─────────────────┐    ┌─────────────────┐    ┌─────────────────┐
│   Streamlit UI  │    │   FastAPI API   │    │  Document Store │
│   (Port 8501)   │◄──►│   (Port 8000)   │◄──►│   (Local Files) │
└─────────────────┘    └─────────────────┘    └─────────────────┘
                                │
                                ▼
┌─────────────────┐    ┌─────────────────┐    ┌─────────────────┐
│   Qdrant Vector │    │   Redis Cache   │    │   AI Models     │
│   Database      │    │   (Sessions)    │    │   (Ollama/HF)   │
│   (Port 6333)   │    │   (Port 6379)   │    │   (Port 11434)  │
└─────────────────┘    └─────────────────┘    └─────────────────┘
```

## 🚀 Quick Start

### Prerequisites

- Python 3.8 or higher
- Docker and Docker Compose
- 8GB+ RAM (for local AI models)
- Git

### Installation

1. **Clone the repository**
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/yourusername/zero-rag.git
   cd zero-rag
   ```

2. **Set up the environment**
   ```bash
   # Create virtual environment
   python -m venv venv
   
   # Activate virtual environment
   # On Windows:
   venv\Scripts\activate
   # On macOS/Linux:
   source venv/bin/activate
   
   # Install dependencies
   pip install -r requirements.txt
   ```

3. **Configure the application**
   ```bash
   # Copy example environment file
   cp env.example .env
   
   # Edit configuration (optional)
   # nano .env
   ```

4. **Start the infrastructure services**
   ```bash
   # Start Qdrant and Redis
   docker-compose up -d
   
   # Verify services are running
   docker-compose ps
   ```

5. **Install and start Ollama (optional, for local AI)**
   ```bash
   # Download Ollama from https://ollama.ai
   # Then pull a lightweight model:
   ollama pull llama3.2:1b
   ```

6. **Validate configuration**
   ```bash
   python scripts/validate_config.py
   ```

7. **Start the application**
   
   **Option A: Use the startup script (Recommended)**
   ```bash
   # Windows:
   start_app.bat
   
   # Or manually:
   python start_app.py
   ```
   
   **Option B: Start services separately**
   ```bash
   # Start the API server (takes 30-45 seconds to fully start)
   python -m uvicorn src.api.main:app --reload --host 127.0.0.1 --port 8000
   
   # In another terminal, start the UI
   streamlit run src/ui/streamlit_app.py
   ```
   
   **Option C: Test API connection**
   ```bash
   # Test if API is running
   python test_api_connection.py
   
   # Wait for API to start and then test
   python test_api_connection.py --wait
   ```

8. **Access the application**
   - Web UI: http://localhost:8501
   - API Documentation: http://localhost:8000/docs

## 📖 Usage Guide

### Web Interface

1. **Upload Documents**
   - Click "Upload Documents" in the sidebar
   - Select your files (TXT, CSV, MD supported)
   - Wait for processing to complete

2. **Ask Questions**
   - Type your question in the chat interface
   - Press Enter or click Send
   - View the AI response with source citations

3. **View Sources**
   - Click on source links in responses
   - See the exact text that was used to generate answers

### API Usage

```python
import requests

# Upload a document
with open('document.txt', 'rb') as f:
    files = {'file': f}
    response = requests.post('http://localhost:8000/upload', files=files)

# Ask a question
response = requests.post('http://localhost:8000/query', json={
    'question': 'What is the main topic of the document?'
})

print(response.json())
```

### Configuration

The system uses environment variables for configuration. Key settings:

```bash
# Database settings
QDRANT_HOST=localhost
QDRANT_PORT=6333
REDIS_HOST=localhost
REDIS_PORT=6379

# AI Model settings
OLLAMA_HOST=http://localhost:11434
OLLAMA_MODEL=llama3.2:1b
EMBEDDING_MODEL_NAME=sentence-transformers/all-MiniLM-L6-v2

# API settings
API_HOST=127.0.0.1
API_PORT=8000
```

See `docs/configuration.md` for complete configuration options.

## 🧪 Testing

Run the test suite:

```bash
# Run all tests
pytest

# Run specific test categories
pytest tests/test_config.py
pytest tests/test_services.py

# Run with coverage
pytest --cov=src
```

### API Connection Testing

Test the API connection and document listing:

```bash
# Test if API is running
python test_api_connection.py

# Wait for API to start and then test
python test_api_connection.py --wait
```

## 🔧 Troubleshooting

### "Cannot reach api" Error

If you see "Cannot reach api" in the UI:

1. **Wait for startup**: The API server takes 30-45 seconds to fully start up
2. **Check if API is running**: Run `python test_api_connection.py --wait`
3. **Start the API server**: Use `python start_app.py` or start manually
4. **Check ports**: Ensure port 8000 is not in use by another service
5. **Check firewall**: Ensure localhost connections are allowed

### Common Issues

- **API server not starting**: Check if all dependencies are installed
- **UI shows disconnected**: Wait 30-45 seconds for API startup, then refresh
- **Document upload fails**: Ensure the API server is fully started
- **Port conflicts**: Change ports in configuration if needed

## 📊 Performance

- **Query Response Time**: < 5 seconds
- **Document Retrieval Accuracy**: > 80%
- **System Uptime**: > 99%
- **Scalability**: 1000+ documents
- **Memory Usage**: < 4GB RAM

## 🔧 Troubleshooting

### Common Issues

**1. API Server Connection Timeout**
```
Error: HTTPConnectionPool(host='localhost', port=8000): Read timed out
```
**Solution:**
- Ensure the API server is running: `python start_app.py`
- Check if port 8000 is available: `netstat -an | findstr :8000` (Windows) or `lsof -i :8000` (Linux/Mac)
- Restart the application using the startup script

**2. File Upload Validation Failed**
```
Error: File validation failed: timeout
```
**Solution:**
- The API server might be overloaded
- Try uploading a smaller file
- Restart the API server
- Check the server logs for errors

**3. Streamlit Can't Connect to API**
```
Error: Cannot connect to ZeroRAG API
```
**Solution:**
- Use the startup script: `python start_app.py`
- Verify both services are running:
  - API: http://localhost:8000/health/ping
  - UI: http://localhost:8501
- Check firewall settings

**4. Database Connection Issues**
```
Error: Connection to Qdrant/Redis failed
```
**Solution:**
- Start infrastructure: `docker-compose up -d`
- Check service status: `docker-compose ps`
- Verify ports are not blocked

### Testing the API Server

Run the API server test to verify functionality:
```bash
python test_api_server.py
```

### Debug Mode

Enable debug logging by setting environment variables:
```bash
export LOG_LEVEL=DEBUG
export API_LOG_LEVEL=debug
```

## 🔧 Development

### Project Structure

```
zero-rag/
├── src/
│   ├── api/           # FastAPI endpoints
│   ├── models/        # Data models
│   ├── services/      # Business logic
│   └── ui/           # Streamlit interface
├── data/             # Document storage
├── tests/            # Test suite
├── docs/             # Documentation
├── scripts/          # Utility scripts
└── docker-compose.yml # Infrastructure
```

### Development Workflow

1. **Set up development environment**
   ```bash
   # Windows
   scripts/setup_dev.ps1
   
   # macOS/Linux
   scripts/setup_dev.sh
   ```

2. **Run development services**
   ```bash
   docker-compose up -d
   ```

3. **Start development servers**
   ```bash
   # API with auto-reload
   python -m uvicorn src.api.main:app --reload
   
   # UI with auto-reload
   streamlit run src/ui/streamlit_app.py
   ```

## 🚀 Deployment

### Local Production

```bash
# Build production image
docker build -t zero-rag .

# Run with production settings
docker run -p 8000:8000 -p 8501:8501 zero-rag
```

### Cloud Deployment

The system is designed to be deployed on any cloud platform:

- **AWS**: Use EC2 with Docker
- **Google Cloud**: Use Compute Engine
- **Azure**: Use Azure Container Instances
- **DigitalOcean**: Use App Platform

## 🤝 Contributing

1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch (`git checkout -b feature/amazing-feature`)
3. Commit your changes (`git commit -m 'Add amazing feature'`)
4. Push to the branch (`git push origin feature/amazing-feature`)
5. Open a Pull Request

## 📝 License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## 🙏 Acknowledgments

- [Qdrant](https://qdrant.tech) for the vector database
- [Ollama](https://ollama.ai) for local AI models
- [HuggingFace](https://huggingface.co) for transformer models
- [FastAPI](https://fastapi.tiangolo.com) for the web framework
- [Streamlit](https://streamlit.io) for the UI framework

## 📞 Support

- **Issues**: [GitHub Issues](https://github.com/yourusername/zero-rag/issues)
- **Documentation**: [Project Wiki](https://github.com/yourusername/zero-rag/wiki)
- **Discussions**: [GitHub Discussions](https://github.com/yourusername/zero-rag/discussions)

---

**Built with ❤️ for the open-source community**

Commit message:

Add debugging scripts and enhance document filtering functionality
- Introduced new debugging scripts for document filtering, RAG pipeline, and upload issues to facilitate troubleshooting and improve system diagnostics.
- Enhanced the API to support document ID filtering in queries, allowing for more precise search results.
- Updated configuration settings for memory management and performance optimization.
- Added comprehensive tests for document filtering and upload processes to ensure functionality and reliability.
- Improved documentation to reflect new features and usage instructions for debugging and filtering capabilities.

README.md, after:

# ZeroRAG 🚀

**A production-ready RAG (Retrieval-Augmented Generation) system built entirely with free/open-source components**

[![Python](https://img.shields.io/badge/Python-3.8+-blue.svg)](https://python.org)
[![FastAPI](https://img.shields.io/badge/FastAPI-0.100+-green.svg)](https://fastapi.tiangolo.com)
[![Qdrant](https://img.shields.io/badge/Qdrant-Vector%20DB-orange.svg)](https://qdrant.tech)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](LICENSE)

## 🎯 Project Overview

ZeroRAG is a cost-effective, production-ready RAG system designed to provide intelligent document search and question-answering capabilities using entirely free and open-source components. Built with a focus on simplicity, performance, and zero ongoing costs.

### Key Features

- 🔍 **Intelligent Document Search**: Upload and search through documents with semantic understanding
- 💬 **AI-Powered Q&A**: Ask questions and get contextual answers from your documents
- 🚀 **Zero Cost**: Built entirely with free/open-source components
- 📊 **Multi-Format Support**: Handle TXT, CSV, MD files (PDF/DOCX coming soon)
- 🔄 **Real-time Streaming**: Get responses as they're generated
- 🎨 **Modern Web UI**: Clean, intuitive Streamlit interface
- 🛡️ **Production Ready**: Comprehensive error handling, logging, and monitoring
- 📱 **Responsive Design**: Works on desktop and mobile devices

### Technology Stack

- **Backend**: FastAPI, Python 3.8+
- **Vector Database**: Qdrant (free, self-hosted)
- **Cache**: Redis (free, self-hosted)
- **AI Models**: 
  - Local: Ollama with Llama 3.2 (1B parameters)
  - Fallback: HuggingFace Transformers
  - Embeddings: Sentence Transformers (all-MiniLM-L6-v2)
- **Frontend**: Streamlit
- **Infrastructure**: Docker Compose
- **Configuration**: Pydantic Settings

## 🏗️ Architecture

```
┌─────────────────┐    ┌─────────────────┐    ┌─────────────────┐
│   Streamlit UI  │    │   FastAPI API   │    │  Document Store │
│   (Port 8501)   │◄──►│   (Port 8000)   │◄──►│   (Local Files) │
└─────────────────┘    └─────────────────┘    └─────────────────┘
                                │
                                ▼
┌─────────────────┐    ┌─────────────────┐    ┌─────────────────┐
│   Qdrant Vector │    │   Redis Cache   │    │   AI Models     │
│   Database      │    │   (Sessions)    │    │   (Ollama/HF)   │
│   (Port 6333)   │    │   (Port 6379)   │    │   (Port 11434)  │
└─────────────────┘    └─────────────────┘    └─────────────────┘
```

## 🚀 Quick Start

### Prerequisites

- Python 3.8 or higher
- Docker and Docker Compose
- 8GB+ RAM (for local AI models)
- Git
- Internet connection for model downloads

#### Required AI Models

The system uses the following pre-trained models that will be downloaded automatically on first use:

- **Sentence Transformer Model**: `sentence-transformers/all-MiniLM-L6-v2` (~90MB)
  - Used for document embeddings and semantic search
  - Downloads automatically when the embedding service starts
  - Stored locally in the HuggingFace cache directory

- **LLM Model**: `llama3.2:1b` (via Ollama)
  - Used for text generation and question answering
  - Requires Ollama to be installed and running
  - Download with: `ollama pull llama3.2:1b`

> **Note**: Model downloads happen automatically on first use, but you can pre-download them to avoid delays:
> ```bash
> # Pre-download sentence transformer model
> python -c "from sentence_transformers import SentenceTransformer; SentenceTransformer('sentence-transformers/all-MiniLM-L6-v2')"
> 
> # Pre-download LLM model (if using Ollama)
> ollama pull llama3.2:1b
> ```

### Installation

1. **Clone the repository**
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/yourusername/zero-rag.git
   cd zero-rag
   ```

2. **Set up the environment**
   ```bash
   # Create virtual environment
   python -m venv venv
   
   # Activate virtual environment
   # On Windows:
   venv\Scripts\activate
   # On macOS/Linux:
   source venv/bin/activate
   
   # Install dependencies
   pip install -r requirements.txt
   ```

3. **Configure the application**
   ```bash
   # Copy example environment file
   cp env.example .env
   
   # Edit configuration (optional)
   # nano .env
   ```

4. **Start the infrastructure services**
   ```bash
   # Start Qdrant and Redis
   docker-compose up -d
   
   # Verify services are running
   docker-compose ps
   ```

5. **Install and start Ollama (optional, for local AI)**
   ```bash
   # Download Ollama from https://ollama.ai
   # Then pull a lightweight model:
   ollama pull llama3.2:1b
   ```

6. **Validate configuration**
   ```bash
   python scripts/validate_config.py
   ```

7. **Start the application**
   
   **Option A: Use the startup script (Recommended)**
   ```bash
   # Windows:
   start_app.bat
   
   # Or manually:
   python start_app.py
   ```
   
   **Option B: Start services separately**
   ```bash
   # Start the API server (takes 30-45 seconds to fully start)
   python -m uvicorn src.api.main:app --reload --host 127.0.0.1 --port 8000
   
   # In another terminal, start the UI
   streamlit run src/ui/streamlit_app.py
   ```
   
   **Option C: Test API connection**
   ```bash
   # Test if API is running
   python test_api_connection.py
   
   # Wait for API to start and then test
   python test_api_connection.py --wait
   ```

8. **Access the application**
   - Web UI: http://localhost:8501
   - API Documentation: http://localhost:8000/docs

## 📖 Usage Guide

### Web Interface

1. **Upload Documents**
   - Click "Upload Documents" in the sidebar
   - Select your files (TXT, CSV, MD supported)
   - Wait for processing to complete

2. **Ask Questions**
   - Type your question in the chat interface
   - Press Enter or click Send
   - View the AI response with source citations

3. **View Sources**
   - Click on source links in responses
   - See the exact text that was used to generate answers

### API Usage

```python
import requests

# Upload a document
with open('document.txt', 'rb') as f:
    files = {'file': f}
    response = requests.post('http://localhost:8000/upload', files=files)

# Ask a question
response = requests.post('http://localhost:8000/query', json={
    'question': 'What is the main topic of the document?'
})

print(response.json())
```

### Configuration

The system uses environment variables for configuration. Key settings:

```bash
# Database settings
QDRANT_HOST=localhost
QDRANT_PORT=6333
REDIS_HOST=localhost
REDIS_PORT=6379

# AI Model settings
OLLAMA_HOST=http://localhost:11434
OLLAMA_MODEL=llama3.2:1b
EMBEDDING_MODEL_NAME=sentence-transformers/all-MiniLM-L6-v2

# API settings
API_HOST=127.0.0.1
API_PORT=8000
```

See `docs/configuration.md` for complete configuration options.

## 🧪 Testing

Run the test suite:

```bash
# Run all tests
pytest

# Run specific test categories
pytest tests/test_config.py
pytest tests/test_services.py

# Run with coverage
pytest --cov=src
```

### API Connection Testing

Test the API connection and document listing:

```bash
# Test if API is running
python test_api_connection.py

# Wait for API to start and then test
python test_api_connection.py --wait
```

## 🔧 Troubleshooting

### "Cannot reach api" Error

If you see "Cannot reach api" in the UI:

1. **Wait for startup**: The API server takes 30-45 seconds to fully start up
2. **Check if API is running**: Run `python test_api_connection.py --wait`
3. **Start the API server**: Use `python start_app.py` or start manually
4. **Check ports**: Ensure port 8000 is not in use by another service
5. **Check firewall**: Ensure localhost connections are allowed

### Common Issues

- **API server not starting**: Check if all dependencies are installed
- **UI shows disconnected**: Wait 30-45 seconds for API startup, then refresh
- **Document upload fails**: Ensure the API server is fully started
- **Port conflicts**: Change ports in configuration if needed

## 📊 Performance

- **Query Response Time**: < 5 seconds
- **Document Retrieval Accuracy**: > 80%
- **System Uptime**: > 99%
- **Scalability**: 1000+ documents
- **Memory Usage**: < 4GB RAM

## 🔧 Troubleshooting

### Common Issues

**1. API Server Connection Timeout**
```
Error: HTTPConnectionPool(host='localhost', port=8000): Read timed out
```
**Solution:**
- Ensure the API server is running: `python start_app.py`
- Check if port 8000 is available: `netstat -an | findstr :8000` (Windows) or `lsof -i :8000` (Linux/Mac)
- Restart the application using the startup script

**2. File Upload Validation Failed**
```
Error: File validation failed: timeout
```
**Solution:**
- The API server might be overloaded
- Try uploading a smaller file
- Restart the API server
- Check the server logs for errors

**3. Streamlit Can't Connect to API**
```
Error: Cannot connect to ZeroRAG API
```
**Solution:**
- Use the startup script: `python start_app.py`
- Verify both services are running:
  - API: http://localhost:8000/health/ping
  - UI: http://localhost:8501
- Check firewall settings

**4. Database Connection Issues**
```
Error: Connection to Qdrant/Redis failed
```
**Solution:**
- Start infrastructure: `docker-compose up -d`
- Check service status: `docker-compose ps`
- Verify ports are not blocked

### Testing the API Server

Run the API server test to verify functionality:
```bash
python test_api_server.py
```

### Debug Mode

Enable debug logging by setting environment variables:
```bash
export LOG_LEVEL=DEBUG
export API_LOG_LEVEL=debug
```

## 🔧 Development

### Project Structure

```
zero-rag/
├── src/
│   ├── api/           # FastAPI endpoints
│   ├── models/        # Data models
│   ├── services/      # Business logic
│   └── ui/           # Streamlit interface
├── data/             # Document storage
├── tests/            # Test suite
├── docs/             # Documentation
├── scripts/          # Utility scripts
└── docker-compose.yml # Infrastructure
```

### Development Workflow

1. **Set up development environment**
   ```bash
   # Windows
   scripts/setup_dev.ps1
   
   # macOS/Linux
   scripts/setup_dev.sh
   ```

2. **Run development services**
   ```bash
   docker-compose up -d
   ```

3. **Start development servers**
   ```bash
   # API with auto-reload
   python -m uvicorn src.api.main:app --reload
   
   # UI with auto-reload
   streamlit run src/ui/streamlit_app.py
   ```

## 🚀 Deployment

### Local Production

```bash
# Build production image
docker build -t zero-rag .

# Run with production settings
docker run -p 8000:8000 -p 8501:8501 zero-rag
```

### Cloud Deployment

The system is designed to be deployed on any cloud platform:

- **AWS**: Use EC2 with Docker
- **Google Cloud**: Use Compute Engine
- **Azure**: Use Azure Container Instances
- **DigitalOcean**: Use App Platform

## 🤝 Contributing

1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch (`git checkout -b feature/amazing-feature`)
3. Commit your changes (`git commit -m 'Add amazing feature'`)
4. Push to the branch (`git push origin feature/amazing-feature`)
5. Open a Pull Request

## 📝 License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## 🙏 Acknowledgments

- [Qdrant](https://qdrant.tech) for the vector database
- [Ollama](https://ollama.ai) for local AI models
- [HuggingFace](https://huggingface.co) for transformer models
- [FastAPI](https://fastapi.tiangolo.com) for the web framework
- [Streamlit](https://streamlit.io) for the UI framework

## 📞 Support

- **Issues**: [GitHub Issues](https://github.com/yourusername/zero-rag/issues)
- **Documentation**: [Project Wiki](https://github.com/yourusername/zero-rag/wiki)
- **Discussions**: [GitHub Discussions](https://github.com/yourusername/zero-rag/discussions)

---

**Built with ❤️ for the open-source community**
